Documentation on Telemetry procedures (#1153)
TheThingsIndustries/lorawan-stack-docs: doc/content/reference/telemetry/cli.md

```

The `uid` value is an UUID generated according to the specifications made on [RFC 4122](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4122) and [DCE 1.1](https://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/9696989899/toc.htm).

## Telemetry Data Types

Below is a JSON object with an example of a full telemetry data message that is sent from the CLI:

```json
{
  "uid": "00000000-0000-0000-0000-000000000000",
  "os": {
    "operating_system": "linux",
    "arch": "amd64",
    "binary_version": "3.27.0-dev",
    "golang_version": " go1.20.7"
  },
  "cli": {}, // An empty object for this field indicates that this data was sent by a CLI instance
  "entities_count": null
}
```

List of telemetry data fields and their purpose:

- `uid`: universal unique identifier attached to telemetry data sent by the CLI
- `os`: basic information about the operating system of the machine which executes the CLI
- `cli`: empty object signaling that the telemetry data is sent from a CLI

Telemetry collection is enabled by default and in order to disable it, set `telemetry.enable` to `false` in the [CLI configuration]({{< ref "/ttn-lw-cli/ttn-lw-cli" >}}):

```yaml
telemetry:
  enable: false
```

## Visualization

> Check out [Telemetry Dashboard](https://telemetry.thethingsstack.io) to see visual representation of collected data. Some of the information available is: amount of each type of entity stored in the IdentityServer, the quantity of gateways for each frequency plan and the amount of end devices that were active in the last month, week and day.

Reviewer: Nit: `Identity Server`.

---

## User's Identification

When the CLI starts for the first time on a new machine or upon clearing the system cache, it creates a file on the system's cache folder with the following data:

```yaml
uid: 00000000-0000-0000-0000-000000000000
last_sent: 2023-08-02T16:45:53.742417-03:00
```

The `uid` value is an UUID generated according to the specifications made on [RFC 4122](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4122) and [DCE 1.1](https://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/9696989899/toc.htm).

## Telemetry Data Types

Below is a JSON object with an example of a full telemetry data message that is sent from the CLI:

```json
{
  "uid": "00000000-0000-0000-0000-000000000000",
  "os": {
    "operating_system": "linux",
    "arch": "amd64",
    "binary_version": "3.27.0-dev",
    "golang_version": " go1.20.7"
  },
  "cli": {}, // An empty object for this field indicates that this data was sent by a CLI instance
  "entities_count": null
}
```

List of telemetry data fields and their purpose:

- `uid`: universal unique identifier attached to telemetry data sent by the CLI
- `os`: basic information about the operating system of the machine which executes the CLI

> - `cli`: signals to the telemetry receptor that the sender should be sending only telemetry data

Author: I'm supposing that the `cli` explanation is not clear and not the entire list of fields with explanation.

Currently the `cli` field only signifies that the telemetry data comes from a CLI, in the future it will contain other information.

I suppose something like `signals that the telemetry data is sent from a CLI` and leave the whole `the sender should be sending only telemetry data` out of the explanation, especially since that is only useful to us.

> - `cli`: signals to the telemetry receptor that the sender should be sending only telemetry data

Reviewer 2: > signals that the telemetry data is sent from a CLI

This is perfect. Let's do that.

---
title: "CLI Telemetry"

> description: "Description of everything that the telemetry procedure collects regarding the CLI's user"

Reviewer 2: `Data collection by The Things Stack CLI telemetry`.

Author: changed it to `Telemetry data collection by The Things Stack' CLI`, let me know what you think

Reviewer 2: Yup, that's good as well.

---
title: "CLI Telemetry"
description: "Description of everything that the telemetry procedure collects regarding the CLI's user"
aliases: "/telemetry/cli"
---

> {{% tts %}}\'s [CLI]({{<ref "/reference/cli">}}) collects **completely anonymous** telemetry data, which is used to help us understand how users interact with our product. For example, the current data helps to have a better insight on what type of machines the CLI is more commonly used. Telemetry collection is enabled by default and does not collect personally identifiable information. The following section section explains what information is collected and how it is anonymised.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
{{% tts %}}\'s [CLI]({{<ref "/reference/cli">}}) collects **completely anonymous** telemetry data, which is used to help us understand how users interact with our product. For example, the current data helps to have a better insight on what type of machines the CLI is more commonly used on. Telemetry collection is enabled by default and does not collect personally identifiable information. The following section section explains what information is collected and how it is anonymised.
```

Reviewer 3: > Telemetry collection is enabled by default and does not collect personally identifiable information.

I think this sentence is worth stressing somehow. Maybe add it as a note or in bold?

Author: > Telemetry collection is enabled by default

In the CLI page I believe its worth making only this bold, as the rest of the phrase is already stressed in the first sentence of the paragraph.
>{{% tts %}}\'s [CLI]({{<ref "/reference/cli">}}) collects **completely anonymous** 

That way we would have something like the image below, what you think @nejraselimovic?
![image](https://github.com/TheThingsIndustries/lorawan-stack-docs/assets/28912302/219d6ce9-3fbf-4e11-9806-d381d5ca03ed)

Author: Actually changed in a way where only the words `enabled` and `not` are bold. I'm marking this conversation as resolved and updating the PR description with the new screenshots

> ## Identification

Reviewer 3: Identification of?

Author: Maybe `User's Identification` would be better?

Reviewer 3: yes, that would be better

When the CLI starts for the first time on a new machine or upon clearing the system cache, it creates a file on the system's cache folder with the following data:

```yaml
uid: 00000000-0000-0000-0000-000000000000
last_sent: 2023-08-02T16:45:53.742417-03:00
```

The `uid` value is an UUID generated according to the specifications made on [RFC 4122](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4122) and [DCE 1.1](https://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/9696989899/toc.htm).

> ## Types of telemetry data

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Telemetry Data Types
```

> Below is an JSON object with an example of a full telemetry data message that is sent from the CLI:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Below is a JSON object with an example of a full telemetry data message that is sent from the CLI:
```

```json
{
  "uid": "00000000-0000-0000-0000-000000000000",
  "os": {
    "operating_system": "linux",
    "arch": "amd64",
    "binary_version": "3.27.0-dev",
    "golang_version": " go1.20.7"
  },
  "cli": {}, // An empty object for this field indicates that this data was sent by a CLI instance
  "entities_count": null
}
```

{{< note >}}

> All new data collected will be added below with the respective version in which the field was introduced. 

Reviewer 3: I don't understand this; below what? respective version of what? which field? Try to be more specific

Author: Removed the idea of listing what field was added in which version.

{{</ note >}}

> List of fields and its purpose on by version:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
List of telemetry data fields and their purpose by version:
```

{{< new-in-version "3.27.1">}}

> - `uid`: universal unique identifier attached to telemetry data sent by the CLI.
> - `os`: basic information about the operating system of the machine which executed the CLI.
> - `cli`: signals to the telemetry receptor that the sender should be sending only telemetry data.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- `uid`: universal unique identifier attached to telemetry data sent by the CLI
- `os`: basic information about the operating system of the machine which execute the CLI
- `cli`: signals to the telemetry receptor that the sender should be sending only telemetry data
```

Author: Not sure so I'm asking, why `execute` instead of `executes` @nejraselimovic

Reviewer 3: sorry, this is a typo by me, ignore this

> ## Disable telemetry

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Disable Telemetry
```

> The telemetry is enabled by default and in order to disable it, set `telemetry.enable` to `false` in the CLI configuration.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Telemetry collection is enabled by default and in order to disable it, set `telemetry.enable` to `false` in the CLI configuration:
```

Reviewer 3: Please link CLI configuration docs

> Example of the configuration file with telemetry disabled:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

```yaml
telemetry:
  enable: false
```

## Visualization

> The visualization of the usage data collected is displayed at `https://telemetry.thethingsstack.io`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Check out [Telemetry Dashboard](https://telemetry.thethingsstack.io) to see visual representation of collected data.
```

Reviewer 3: It would be good if you could shortly describe what can we see there, at least 2-3 important graphs

---
title: "CLI Telemetry"
description: "Description of everything that the telemetry procedure collects regarding the CLI's user"
aliases: "/telemetry/cli"
---

> The Things Stack\'s [CLI]({{<ref "/reference/cli">}}) collects **completely anonymous** telemetry data, which is used to help us understand how users interact with our product. For example, the current data helps to have a better insight on what type of machines the CLI is more commonly used. The objective with the introduction of telemetry is to be able to better understand what is used so that we can expand and improve on the experience that we provide to our users.

Reviewer 2: Please replace the last line with the following: 
`Telemetry collection is enabled by default and does not collect personally identifiable information. The following section section explains what information is collected and how it is anonymised.`

> The Things Industries\' [command-line interface]({{<ref "/reference/cli">}}) collects **completely anonymous** telemetry data, which is used to help us understand how users interact with our product. For example, the current data helps to have a better insight on what type of machines the CLI is more commonly used. The objective with the introduction of telemetry is to be able to better understand what is used so that we can expand and improve on the experience that we provide to our users.

Reviewer: I think you meant The Things Stack's CLI, not The Things Industries'.

## Identification

> The worry that data is attached to an easily identifiable piece of information is common and for good reason, therefore we believe that it is the first thing we should address.

Reviewer 2: This isn't necessary. This is a technical documentation so let's skip straight to the technicality.

> When the CLI start the procedure to collect and send the telemetry data for the first time, it creates a file on the system's cache folder which contains the following data: 

Reviewer 2: `When the CLI starts for the first time on a new machine or upon clearing the system cache, it creates a file on the system's cache folder with the following data`.

```yaml
uid: 00000000-0000-0000-0000-000000000000
last_sent: 2023-08-02T16:45:53.742417-03:00
```

> The `uid` field attracts the most attention since initally an user does not know how its value is generated, but to set its value we use Google's [golang package](https://github.com/google/uuid) which is based on the [RFC 4122](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4122) and DCE 1.1: Authentication and Security Services.

Reviewer: I think in this sentence you meant to also mention that `uid` is a UUID. I think you should mention just that, without mentioning the underlying package or other implementation details.

Author: Opted to mention the specifications that the underling package uses just in case someone is curious enough to read the set of rules which the identifier is complain to.

## Types of telemetry data

> Bellow is an JSON object with an example of a full telemetry data message that is sent from the CLI to us:

Reviewer 2: `Below`. Please remove `to us` at the end of the sentence.

```json
{
  "uid": "00000000-0000-0000-0000-000000000000",
  "os": {
    "operating_system": "linux",
    "arch": "amd64",
    "binary_version": "3.27.0-dev",
    "golang_version": " go1.20.7"
  },

>   "cli": {},// An empty object instead of `null` to represent that the data is sent by a CLI.,

Reviewer 2: `// An empty object for this field indicates that this data was sent by a CLI instance`.

  "entities_count": null
}
```

{{< note >}}

> All new data collected will be added bellow with the respective version in which the field was introduced. 

Reviewer 2: `below`

{{</ note >}}

List of fields and its purpose on by version:

> {{< new-in-version "3.27.1">}}

Reviewer: This whole functionality is new to that version.

Reviewer 3: Can you explain why is it important for users to know which fields were introduced by which TTS version? Because usually we delete these new-in-version tags after 2-3 minor versions

Author: well the intent behind this was to have transparency in regards to what was added when due to the possibility of users having different versions of the Stack in their own deployment. But considering that each new telemetry data collected can be disabled separately its probably okay to not specify the version in which they were introduced.

- `uid`: universal unique identifier attached to telemetry data sent by the CLI.
- `os`: basic information about the operating system of the machine which executed the CLI.
- `cli`: signals to the telemetry receptor that the sender should be sending only telemetry data.

## Disable telemetry

The telemetry is enabled by default and in order to disable it, set `telemetry.enable` to false in the CLI configuration.

Example of the configuration file with telemetry disabled:
```yaml
telemetry:
  enable: false
```

## Visualization

> The visualization of the usage data collected is displayed at https://telemetry.thethingsstack.io

Reviewer: Wrap the link, and don't forget a dot at the end.
